Hi, everybody. Thank you so much for joining us for today's RStudio Data Science Live event.
My name is Tom Mock. I'm going to be your host for today. I'm our customer enablement lead at RStudio.
I'm going to be going through a lot of different content specifically related to RStudio Connect.
We're also running kind of a fun experiment in streaming to many different locations.
So a lot of the time when we've been talking to our customers or people interested in learning about open source data science,
it might be coming from YouTube or LinkedIn or Twitter.
So we're trying to meet everyone where they want to be in streaming to all those different platforms.
So we're hoping everything goes really well today. But if you do have any hiccups, please bear with us.
We're really excited about trying out these new different streams and seeing if we can have a good time with it.
For today, this will be recorded so you can always watch the recording afterwards on YouTube.
And the content will be available in terms of the slides as well as the code I show here on the screen.
So the slides are going to be at colorado.rstudio.com rsc.automate.
And we can actually send that out through the chat.
And then we'll also have the code examples I'm using as available as well.
And those will be shared in the chat.
So all these different possibilities in terms of like what you can build with open source are in Python and then going further.
So again, my name is Tom Mock. We are trying out this new data science live is kind of a webinar style event, but going to many different locations.
So hopefully this kind of again is an exciting moment for you.
And you get to kind of join along with us as we're learning and sharing some knowledge for today.
Before I get started, I also want to give a quick shout out to my colleague Alex Gold, who's one of those solutions engineering managers here at RStudio.
He put together this great bike share example that we're going to be walking through in depth along with a few other pieces of code.
And then also my friend Katie Masiello, who's a customer success manager at RStudio.
And she put together a great point blank demo content that we're going to be showing as well today as part of kind of the data validation, ETL scripts and other content.
And kind of automation of data analysis and data quality and validation.
So as far as the core idea of what we're going to be talking about today, we're going to be looking at RStudio Connect, which is kind of our premier platform for building and sharing, or I guess in this case, sharing data science products and building kind of insights among your organization.
The core idea is that RStudio Connect makes it easy to share your data products that you build in both R and in Python.
For your data scientists, they get to stay and use their preferred open source data science tooling.
So again, R and Python, but they're also able to get these things off of their laptop and share these insights to impact decision making across the organization.
So they might be creating things like APIs with Plumber or sharing datasets as a pin or versioning models with pins or deploying shiny applications for interactive web applications.
Or lastly, what we'll be talking a lot about today, sharing R Markdown reports or automating and scheduling scripts or R scripts through R Markdown documents.
Now for our Python colleagues, in terms of the Python data scientists, they also have a rich workflow that they can kind of put things on to connect and use.
So specifically, we'll be talking a little bit about Jupyter today, which is a great notebook that actually supports Python and R inside it, just like R Markdown can support R and Python.
And there's other data products you can publish to connect like Streamlet, Dash, Bokeh for interactive web apps, or Flask and FastAPI for publishing APIs or RESTful APIs in Python.
Now, as far as getting these things out to your stakeholders, there's what we call kind of the easy button.
You can just kind of go into a data product, click publish, and then send it out to your organization.
Your decision makers, whether they're business stakeholders, executives, or other colleagues can then access the things you're creating via a web portal with authentication and with kind of automatic scaling within your server component.
So lots of ability to create and share data products with our tooling, and that's what we'll be talking a little bit about today.
I'm seeing a lot of fun comments from people saying where they're joining us from. It's always exciting to see people from around the world.
I think that's also one of the exciting things about doing these live webinars is we're able to kind of reach people across the world.
So thank you so much for sharing all that. I'm joining you from Texas here in the U.S. and excited to see some folks from around the world.
Now, as far as kind of the data products we're talking about today, we're basically talking almost exclusively about notebooks on RStudio Connect.
So the idea here is you can automate the execution of arbitrary, basically any R and Python code you want with notebooks.
So you can have R Markdown for native R code or Jupyter for native Python code in the RStudio Connect ecosystem.
Now, when I talk about automation in a little bit or scheduling, what I'm really saying here is that Connect gives you this ability to schedule the re-execution of that code.
So not only can you create the initial document, publish that, or share it wherever you want, but you can also have it re-execute on a schedule.
So I have lots of scripts that I run either daily or weekly that clean up some data, pull it together, and then save the data out, basically ETL jobs.
What Connect gives me the ability to do is to specify things like a specific time zone.
I'm in, you know, Texas, so I'm in GMT minus six, and I want things to execute at a specific time.
So let's say 1037 a.m. on December 9th, which is about 30 minutes from now, give or take a few minutes.
And I want this to run every single day, and I want it to republish the output, basically override itself when it's published.
I also have the ability to do things like send an email from Connect, and this would actually send out an email to myself or to colleagues.
Now, when I say arbitrary R code or arbitrary Python code up here, that really means essentially any R and Python code you can write, you can embed into these documents.
So I could have things like HTML widgets or leaflet plots or interactive kind of basic JavaScript inside my R Markdown document.
And in Python, you have similar libraries, so things like Plotly for interactive graphics, as well as kind of the execution of the code itself.
So maybe retraining a model or saving a data set out.
All these things that we're going to be talking about today, and I'm very excited to go through it all.
Now, you might ask, why notebooks as opposed to maybe a .R or a .py file?
Well, notebooks are very powerful in that you can achieve the primary goal, which might be actually executing your Python or R code and very useful side effects.
So you could also have things like writing up to sync or to separate output.
So you might be generating a RDS file or CSV file or a pickle file in Python or graphics or tables or whatever else like that is your primary goal.
But your useful side effects are that you're also creating a nice document or a nice report that comes along with it.
And that's what the power of a notebook gives you.
So you get this rich self-contained output and report.
Basically, the notebook is the data product in addition to whatever it's actually doing.
It's actually self-documenting.
It's showing you when it occurred.
It's telling you all these things about like the code you executed and the context it was run in.
There will be a lot of demo components.
I do have some slides to get through, and then we'll go into some of the demos.
And importantly, you know, these assets you create are shareable and hostable, meaning that not only can you create a notebook,
but with Kinect, you can actually put it on there, share it out, host it there, and people can access it through the web.
They're easy to read in terms of it's a typical document.
They're self-documenting and easy to use as the data scientist and the end user.
So importantly, R Markdown and Jupyter often and almost always show the code that's used to execute along with all the embedded outputs in line.
So for reproducibility standpoint, you kind of know what's going on.
And what was the code that was run when this was scheduled?
Now, you can hide some of that code execution if you're reporting to business users.
We'll also talk a little bit about that.
And then lastly, R Markdown and things scheduled on RStudio Connect can also generate additional side effects.
Things like sending an email.
So not only can it execute the notebook, execute the R code or the Python code, it's also sending out this email or kind of message.
It's also sending out this email or kind of many emails to all your colleagues, updating them only when something happens.
So kind of meeting where they are in their inbox rather than asking them to go visit, say, a dashboard or something else.
Now, one more slide, then I'll jump into a little bit of a demo in terms of what the actual platform looks like.
But why RStudio Connect?
Obviously, like part of the beauty of this is that with open source data science, you can build your own tooling.
And that's fantastic.
RStudio Connect is a great solution in that you can use multiple languages there.
So R and Python native, as long with embedding things like SQL or Spark through Sparkly R or PySpark.
You have environment isolation in terms of you're limiting the packages and libraries to specific versions.
So capturing that environment.
And when you publish it, that environment is kind of trapped and isolated with it.
You have your enterprise-grade authentication, so you can make IT happy and have all the things you're sharing be secure.
From a data science perspective, you also have things like push-button deployment for easily deploying it out,
as well as things that are more robust like Git or continuous integration or continuous deployment from, say, Azure DevOps or something.
So we'll be going into all of that.
And I'll be showing a little bit more of the content that we'll be talking about today.
The last part before we get into a little bit of the demo is the re-execution of R and Python code on demand or on the schedule.
So you can actually show a little bit of the manual re-execution or scheduling automation of tasks.
So let's actually flip over to Connect, and I'll show you a little bit what that looks like.
So I've hopped into Connect.
You might have actually seen for that brief moment that I'm showing my slides here,
and that I have this ability to schedule and distribute data science products.
This is actually a data science product running on RStudio Connect, so my slides are on Connect.
But more typically, rather than slides, I might actually create something like a basic report that's being scheduled.
So here I've got an older script that I've been running for a while, just looking at the weather forecast in Boston.
So RStudio's headquarters are in Boston, so let's take a look at that.
So this is a very basic report in terms of it's just got the title, it's got a plot confirmation here,
and it's saying a little bit about a data set and a very basic plot.
Not the most exciting thing.
The actual benefit is that this is taking that data and writing it out to what we call a PIN,
or an external data set that's being updated.
So this could be running on RStudio Connect, and you could actually be saving data to Connect,
or you could be saving data to a PIN.
It could be running on RStudio Connect, and you could actually be saving data to Connect,
or you could be saving data out to Amazon S3, or to Azure Data Lake, or to SharePoint,
or wherever you really want to save it.
There's a lot of different options.
So this report that I'm looking at actually has the ability to show me this output,
so I have this confirmation when I go and visit it that, yes, it ran,
and I have some little basic information about it, but I still have access to the raw data,
which is the purpose of this report, is scraping and collecting this data
and storing it so I can look at it in the future.
You can see here on the right inside Connect that I already have the document scheduled,
so it's going to be running in my time zone in Chicago.
I started it just before Thanksgiving in preparation for today's kind of presentation,
and I have it run every morning at 6 a.m.
Just in case I ever had to go to the Boston office, I want to know before I fly out,
what's the weather like?
And it's going to run every single day and publish an output after it's generated.
Now, this is overriding itself, so you can see that for today,
it was run as of December 9th, but with Connect,
I can also go up here and look at the history,
so I can see every run that occurred and look at older timeframes.
So I have these snapshots of what the report looked like,
even though the data is being updated to a separate environment.
So these reports themselves, kind of as a side effect,
are very beneficial in terms of I can go look at the different pieces
and kind of make sure that things are going as expected,
in addition to them actually executing properly.
Another benefit of Connect in terms of more from the admin perspective
is if I go in here to the admin panel and look at scheduled content,
I can see all the different things that have been scheduled for my entire team.
So you can see there's a lot of stuff that we've scheduled here for our demo server,
and some of these are very common.
So some of them are occurring down to the minute,
and some of them are occurring maybe once a day or a few times a day.
So I get this nice little snapshot and be like,
hey, maybe I don't want to have this be running every single minute.
I can go check on that, view the content,
and make sure I actually want it to be executing,
as well as the timeframes it's executing,
making sure things are overlaying and that we have everything going nicely.
So let's hop back into the slides real quick,
and I'm going to talk a little bit on automation,
and then we'll go back into a demo portion
and actually show a little bit of code.
So I showed you a little bit about how RStudio Connect works,
how you can schedule things,
some of the benefits of the admin pane
and kind of seeing all the different automation that's possible.
But what are the things you actually want to automate
or things that you want to schedule?
So there's a spectrum of needs here.
In terms of things you might publish or automate.
So you might have data updates like I just showed,
like you have this ETL script
where it's taking data from an API, saving it,
and then appending it to a database
or to some flat file where it's storing it for later.
You might have a report that's running.
So you just want to report on that data that's being updated.
And actually, the part of automation here
is creating a new report without you having to manually run it.
And then delivering that to your colleagues.
Another common use case we see
is automated model training, updates, or batch scoring.
So here you're either training an update, training a model,
updating an existing model,
or sending that model out to actually do some scoring.
So like running through, forming some predictions
and then saving those scores out into a database.
And then lastly, something I'll talk about in a little bit
is automated email delivery with warnings or updates
or just nice to knows.
So not only do you have the actual report running
and connect handling the environments
and the creation of those reports,
but sometimes you want optional reports.
Basically, you want to know only when something fails
or only when something goes above or below a certain threshold.
So by combining emails along with your reporting
or your automation of data science,
you can basically get your warning only when it's needed.
So you have a high signal to noise ratio
and you're not just getting updates all the time,
but only when something occurs.
So as part of these automated data updates,
we're going to share my desktop here
and I'm going to show you just a quick example of a pin real quick.
For pins, this is going to be a very straightforward kind of code,
but I'm just taking a dataset and saving it out to RStudio Connect.
So this is actually, you might see a .R file.
So here I'm loading the pins library,
which allows me to take datasets
and push them out to a remote location.
And I'm loading dplyr just so I have the pipe,
but maybe I want to do some data manipulation as well.
So number one, I'm actually going to form a connection
to what we call a board,
where a board is a collection of pins
or a collection of datasets that you're storing.
There's native connectors to things like AWS S3
or Azure AD, Azure Data Lake Service,
as well as Google Cloud, Kaggle,
and a few different other locations.
So I can just call a board register RStudio Connect.
It's going to automatically read in my R environment
for the URL and my credentials.
And then it's going to write out a specific dataset to this board.
So I say, this board that I just connect to,
take a dataset.
In this case, we'll just take MT cars,
a little toy dataset, and write it out to pins,
write it out on this remote location.
So if I execute all this code,
it's going to connect to Colorado,
which is our demo server.
It's going to take that dataset
and writing it out to MT cars.
Now, you might say, like, nothing exciting happened.
I just saved the dataset out somewhere.
But the benefit being,
is that it's now hosted on RStudio Connect.
So if I go to content for our RStudio Connect demo server,
let it load for a second,
I can actually show you that dataset we just created.
So now I have this dataset.
And of course, I can download the dataset
if I want to by clicking on it.
It gives me a nice little preview.
But more importantly, I have this code,
meaning I can read it from anywhere.
So I can read this from a scheduled document.
I can read it from a different computer
or from a different server.
I can give this to someone else and they can use it.
So I have this dataset that can be shared.
So this basic idea of just taking a data
from my laptop or from an API or somewhere else,
putting it up into somewhere where we can all use it,
makes it more consistent and more,
basically, readier for this automation task.
So the packages we're talking about,
I talked a little bit about pins.
We're going to talk a little bit more about Arvest
and the HTTR package for accessing web data.
Arvest specifically allows us to access like websites
or embedded data in websites
and kind of download that or scrape it.
And HTTR actually allows us to query APIs.
So you might have like a RESTful API
that you're sending some credentials to
and accessing data from.
We also have dbplyr and sparklyr
for accessing, writing to, or reading from
SQL databases or Spark clusters or connections.
And then pins I talked about briefly
for uploading files, data, or arbitrary R objects.
I wanted to talk about pins first
because you can see that it was easy to get started
in terms of I just loaded my library,
made my connection, and then uploaded the dataset.
But these other options are very valid as well
and might be more useful in, say,
a data engineering context
where you're pulling data from other sources
and then saving them out somewhere else.
So the pins package makes it easy
to publish things like data, models,
and other objects and make it easy
to share across projects and with your colleagues.
So what I showed you was using Connect
as a board and writing a data frame out to it.
So we first formed this connection.
I'm using board RStudio Connect,
but it could very easily, you know,
be a different cloud provider
or somewhere else besides RStudio Connect.
And then I take that board
and I write it out somewhere else.
So here I write out our tidy sales data,
save it as sales summary,
and it's going to be a type of RDS.
So I can basically specify what is the file type.
Maybe I want a CSV so it's operational
between Python and R,
or I want to upload a Parquet file
so it's more efficiently stored,
or what other file I want to write,
I have the ability to specify that file type
and upload it or write it out.
And then the real benefit here
is then in a downstream automated report,
I can actually connect back to that board
and read it in.
So you might have heard of people having friction
when they're scheduling something
or trying to automate a task,
and they're not able to access the data.
So having PINS available
to access very specific files,
update them in place, or overwrite them
is a very powerful workflow.
The other benefit is that while PINS
is really used a lot as a way
to share data across a team,
you can upload any,
basically any arbitrary R object.
So that means you could save model objects.
You could train a model,
save it as an RDS,
and save that as a PIN.
You can then version the PIN,
and you can access it downstream
and look at the very different uses
of that model,
whether it's loading it into an API
or loading it into a Shiny application
and then using it there.
I mentioned this just a bit ago,
but PINS are not limited
to just RStudio Connect.
While you can access data there,
you are very often going to be pulling in data
from, say, a cloud provider,
local folders, or in some organizations,
things like OneDrive or SharePoint,
and you can kind of move
between those different data sets
and move data in and out
according to the locations you want to go.
One benefit specifically for RStudio Connect
is that you are kind of keeping your data
close to your data products,
across those different things.
So you would be using, say,
a separate login for AWS
versus Azure versus GCP.
For RStudio Connect,
you're using the same credentials
to log in and access your data throughout.
And then it's not just limited
to RDS files or R files.
You can also upload things
like JSON, CSVs, Arrow,
or QS files,
and anything else
that can't be read and write natively,
you could just upload
and download those.
So I really like using, say, Parquet files
because they're used a lot
in downstream kind of data engineering
or data lake environments,
and they're very efficient to store
and very fast to read.
So the efficiency there is beneficial
in terms of a Parquet file
might actually be like one-tenth
the size of a CSV,
so it's cheaper to upload,
download, and still really,
really fast to read in
with the Arrow package.
Rather than working
with a bunch of flat files,
you might be working with a SQL database,
and you can write either native SQL code
in R notebooks
or in Python notebooks,
or you can use something like dbplyr,
which is a wrapper around dplyr,
to actually translate your R code
into SQL on the backend.
So this is very powerful
for using the exact same syntax
for in-memory operations
that your dplyr you know and love,
but also writing out
in SQL databases
with the same dplyr code.
Of course, you can always escape out
to, you know,
writing native SQL chunks
or SQL code if you wanted to do that,
but dbplyr is very powerful
for not having to do
that mental model switching
of moving from R to SQL
back to R and vice versa,
just sticking to dplyr.
As far as what dbplyr can look like,
you can use dplyr again
against SQL databases
and using R or PySpark
to work against Spark clusters
in R and Python.
So first, just like we showed
kind of with pins,
is you need to form a connection.
Basically, you need to give it
your credentials,
who am I,
and who am I going to connect to?
So we'll have in this example,
we're connecting to a MySQL database,
and then I'm making a connection
to a very specific table
within that database,
and with this API package
and with this table command,
I can then do my dplyr queries
and it'll actually execute them
in the database.
So I've saved this flights database
as a table connection.
I can look at the flights database,
group by specific thing,
summarize it,
and get the results back.
So this is essentially
the same dplyr code you know
and love,
but it's being translated
into Python code.
And then lastly,
you might have like a data automation process
where you're accessing web data.
So maybe you're, you know,
scraping web pages
or you're sending curl queries
out to a RESTful API
with HTTR.
Or there's also
the GraphQL API package
you could use,
ghql from our OpenSci
for those GraphQL API endpoints
that you might run into.
The table or tbl function
is from the dpi function
or dpi package.
So when you load this initially dplyr,
you have dbi to form the connection
and then you can form the table
command around it
and then just execute your dplyr code.
So we talked a lot about
these different data sources.
What this really is is like
you're doing some type of ETL automation.
So you're going to extract data
from a directory database,
from your customer data,
marketing data, business data,
machine data, API, whatever.
You're just grabbing different data
from these heterogeneous data sources.
Then while the data is kind of streaming in,
you're transforming it
into a standardized useful format
so it's ready for your downstream analysis
or your downstream applications and systems.
Then you're going to load the data
or the L in ETL,
load the data into the long-term store,
most typically a database,
warehouse, or data lake
as a flat file like Parquet, for example.
So this can be done
with R Markdown or Jupyter
in terms of like you could have
a SQL R or Python code
executing as I showed before
with those packages
that's bringing in data
from all over the place,
transforming the data in memory,
and then loading the data
into your long-term store.
So actually writing out to say
an alternative,
you might actually do something
like extract load transform or ELT.
Here we're doing the extracting
the raw data itself
and then just loading it
into a storage area,
basically saving it as it is.
We're not transforming it ahead of time.
We're just saving the raw files
or loading them in as they are.
So downstream applications
in this case or other processes
are then going to transform
or otherwise process
as raw or semi-structured
as opposed to being kind of ready
for analysis by your data analyst.
Now, the benefit here is
I mentioned Apache Arrow Project
a little bit before.
Having the ability to write out
to files like Parquet
is really useful here
or to JSON, for example,
as you're going to be getting
potentially data from APIs
that are stored as JSON
or you want to have
the ability to read files.
R and Python both have rich support
for doing this within
the cloud environments.
You might be extracting the data,
loading it into a cloud environment
and then transforming it later
when you're ready.
So with R, you can go to AWS,
Azure, or GCP with these
specific packages.
And then pins, again,
has wrappers around all the
different cloud providers
so you can wrap around
cloud APIs or command line
interfaces or software developer kits.
For example, things like the Boto3
package for Amazon Web Services S3.
So both R and Python
have this rich experience
of writing, doing ETL and ELT work
that you can schedule and automate.
The last part,
and just kind of alluded to it,
but Arrow also gives you ability
to efficiently read and write files
and transmit them around.
So you can do compressed formats
along with more basic formats
like CSV and even more complex
objects like Feather or IPC.
Again, this is very useful
working with data warehouses
and data lakes in terms of giving
R as well as Python the ability
to manipulate and work with
Parquet files, which are very
commonly used in some of the
enterprise-grade data lakes
or data warehousing software.
Lastly, with the Arrow
and writing out of data sets,
you can also partition your data
and transmit the data
into different separations
and individual structuring
of the data files in, say,
like a high format where it's
separated by month or year
or something else like that.
Now, the last part in terms
of automating data,
and we're going to be jumping
into a live demo of all of this
together here in just one second,
is point blank for data validation.
So as you're pulling data in,
obviously you can have SQL code
that the data is kind of
as you expected,
and this is what point blank
and R is for,
is not only bringing the data in
and doing your extract
and transformation,
but validating the data
as you're loading it.
So when you're creating these reports,
yes, the goal is to extract
the data, load it into a database.
But in the middle,
you also have a report being
generated saying,
so brief overview here,
and then we'll jump into the demo
in terms of what this all looks like.
So if you're scheduling data set updates
or automated data pipelines,
you're bringing in data
from all over the place.
SQL databases,
potentially flat files
or individual files like CSVs
or web APIs,
these get read into R
or Python notebooks that are being
executed on Connect
and you're feeding those in
in isolation of them.
Once the report is executed,
then you have a filled out report.
Basically, you can fill it
with all this information about
what was the data you brought in?
What was the date?
Was it successful?
What did the data look like?
And then you have that beneficial
side effect or that intentional
side effect of writing the data
out to the outputs or the sink
wherever you're putting it.
So we talked about this.
We've talked a lot about code
and kind of the different packages.
I want to show you a quick example
of, say, like point blank
and what this might actually look like.
So point blank, again,
lets me do data validation
on either in memory or in database data.
So as part of your ETL process,
you might pull in some data.
As we're seeing here,
this is like bird strike data
from a different API
that Katie Masiello put together.
And it's got a couple
different documents here.
So it's got some reporting
that's going on.
It's doing some scanning
and analysis of the data.
And by using our markdown
to do this and scheduling it on Connect,
you have the ability to build out
this robust analysis
and this robust reporting around it
in addition to actually
saving the data out.
So we'll look at the daily report
real quick here.
So here for the API,
so it's actually going
and finding an API, querying it,
saying here's the timeframe
it's being queried at,
throwing in our API key,
which is being added here,
and then getting some type of response.
So looking at the response,
exploring how long it took to run,
and then doing a data validation here.
So because it's done in our markdown,
you have this ability to have
basically green and red indicators
for was it successful or did it fail?
So you've used Point Blank
to create this agent response.
It's going to look over
all the different parts of the table,
interrogate and say,
did it pass all the different validations?
And are validations passed?
If they failed,
it would give us a warning
about where they failed.
Now as far as does the data make sense,
we might have more robust things
saying like was the data between a range
or was it greater than or equal to?
So Point Blank also gives you
the ability to query specific columns.
So here I've got,
we're querying to say,
should these values be between 0 and 500?
We should never have negative values here,
and 500 is the theoretical limit
that we've ever seen.
So these should all pass,
and we have no evaluation issues
because it's saying yes,
it's between these ranges.
Or maybe it should be greater than
or equal to in terms of,
it should be above a value
rather than between a value.
For any rows that failed
or any observations
that were concerning,
we can actually download a CSE file
and look at those different rows
that were wrong.
So I can actually open up the CSV file
and look at it,
and it will show me the data points
where those were failed.
There's only 45 failure rows,
so not too worrisome
out of the many rows that we have here,
but you have that escape hatch
if you wanted to use it.
So all to say that like
when you're doing this reporting
or you're doing this automation,
not only can you bring the data in,
you can write it out,
but you can also have
these robust reports in the middle,
basically doing the validation
and doing the reporting around it
that are scheduled out.
So you could have,
you know, not just the effect,
but all of the in-between reporting,
and lastly,
having like a nice graphic at the end
in addition to the tables
and the warnings
and the data validation steps
that you're doing.
Now,
this example may not,
you know,
obviously like you may not be doing
as much of this.
Maybe you're doing more machine learning
as opposed to data extraction
and ETL work.
So a more complex
kind of data science focused task,
as opposed to maybe data engineering
or data preparation,
is this end-to-end example
from my colleague,
Alex Gold.
So here,
we're actually doing something similar.
We're bringing data in
from an API,
scheduling it to be cleaned,
updated,
and saved out to both a database
and to a PIN,
and then loading that
into an API downstream
that's running in production.
And all of this is being executed
inside of RStudio Connect.
So this is where we're going to spend
most of our time remaining,
is kind of diving into a little bit
of this example
and how you can kind of
schedule these out
and what they look like
running on RStudio Connect.
So let's close out
a few of these examples.
Because we're done with those.
Now, for this bike share,
you know,
there's a lot going on.
So this is the overview
of what it looks like.
So again,
bringing data in,
data import,
cleaning,
and training some models,
saving it out to a database,
and then saving it out
as an API
and a Shiny application
that are being fed
the downstream data.
Because it's on Connect,
I have this kind of landing page
I've created
or that we've created
with Connect widgets,
basically give me the ability
to write about this project.
You can imagine that
with a data science project
of this scale,
you have a bunch
of different scheduled jobs.
Not only do you have the ETL tasks,
things we've covered
a little bit before,
but you also have modeling.
So maybe you're scoring the data
and doing batch scoring
and writing out the values
to a database
or training the model itself,
or you want to send out
a specific email
if a criteria is met
or not met.
And then lastly,
you have the actual data sets
that you're creating.
So the pins I've saved out,
so these are the static files
that are being uploaded
with the bike model
as a XGBoost saved out,
the scoring and the error,
and then information
just about the metadata
about the bike station
and environment.
What this is basically doing
is grabbing a bunch
of metadata
around these bikes
and bike shares in Seattle
and saying, okay,
what bikes are actually
going to be available
in the future?
That's why we call it
the bike share example.
Going back down here
to our scheduled jobs,
let's just show real quick
the ETL step
and then we're going to move
on a little bit.
So here, again,
you have a bit more
bare bones report.
It's basically just saying,
hey, you know,
here's the analysis.
It ran about a week ago
and was executed
on a schedule.
It's using the ODBC package
to form a connection
to a database.
We form a connection
with the database
and then clean up the data
and write it back out.
So we're grabbing data
from both the database
and a pin and an API,
and then we're writing out
the data with dbplyr.
So our query
that we're actually running
is a group by,
summarize,
interjoin,
and then writing out
the raw SQL code
and showing that query.
So I don't know about you,
but writing out this SQL code
by hand as opposed
to writing in dplyr,
I'd much rather write it
in dplyr
and get the rendered SQL code
through dbplyr here.
It's a bit more easy
to stay in the mental model
of R as opposed
to switching between R
and SQL.
And then lastly,
we have kind of the data
saved out,
and we're actually writing it
to the database.
You can see there's about
10 million rows
that have been changed
here and updated,
so a lot of data
that we're working with.
Now, as far as scheduling those,
I did briefly show scheduling
those documents before,
but let's just show you
what scheduling it would look like
just so we know
how to do that again.
So I'm going back
into Connect,
and we're going to show
the bike share
and show the bike scoring
this time.
So here,
I'm actually looking
at the document running
on RStudio Connect,
and it has been scheduled
to execute on a scheduling.
So here, we're actually
scoring the data
and moving on to that step
as opposed to doing ETL.
Now, again,
this is very easy.
I just publish the code
and the actual R Markdown document,
and I can go in here
and schedule it to occur
at a very specific time,
3 a.m. every morning
so that it's not conflicting
with any other interactive work
that I'm doing today.
So this would be
a specific start time
running at the daily schedule,
although I could change
it to be weekly
down to the minute
or even more frequently,
and it's going to publish
the output here again.
So I can look at the history
and look at previous versions
of this report that ran,
say, back in March
as opposed to more recently.
So this idea
in terms of like
we've shown the bike
share,
we've shown the ETL work
that's going on there,
and we hinted at
that there's these,
you know,
more robust kind of
data science pipelines
or model training.
What we're showing here
is really automated reporting
in terms of we're moving
beyond just the ETL work
and saying,
okay, now I'm actually
doing model training
or reporting on the model
or sending out reports
to my data science colleagues
or my business users.
So for this automated reporting,
you can, again,
schedule our Markdown
in Jupyter,
which can be used
as a report.
And these reports
have many different purposes.
They might be intended
just for the data scientist
or their team,
meaning that they're going
to show all the code.
The metadata there
is so that the data scientists
and the data analysts
working with the data
know what's going on.
Alternatively,
there might be reports
for business users
or executives,
people who just want
to consume the final output
or they want to get
some type of like insight
a report delivered to them
as opposed to understanding
what the code is doing.
They're more interested
in what the actual output is.
And obviously,
there's going to be
a spectrum between these
where you might have reports
that are useful
for both the data scientists
and the business users
or vice versa.
All are valid
in terms of like
you're thinking about here
what is shown in the report,
what is the ultimate purpose
of the report,
and the persona
it's being created for.
So our reports
for data scientists
would be fairly bare bones,
you know,
in terms of like
I'm showing this report,
it's not the most beautiful thing,
but it's telling me,
hey, this report runs
after the data has been cleaned,
it's running an XGBoost model,
and then it's writing out
and loading the model
and scoring it.
Great.
It's doing all the different steps
that are expected
and the data scientist
is happy with that.
The report itself,
in this case,
is more of a side effect.
The primary purpose
is like automating
the model training
and model scoring.
But again,
that report is a useful
side effect.
You have the report
that's beautiful
or that you can build
different components into
to visually check
or to report on
the data science pipeline
that you've created,
as well as,
you know,
writing out the output
or writing out the model
or the data somewhere else.
So again,
this could be ETL
or ELT work,
data cleaning,
data preparation,
or the example we just showed
is more of like
model training,
batch scoring,
maybe data imputation
or validation
that we showed
with point blank.
All those things
are really intended
for data scientists
or data analysts.
While the business users
might be interested
in knowing
that the data is valid
and has been validated,
they're probably more likely
in receiving
a clean,
pretty report
at the end of the day.
So as far as the examples
from the bike share,
I showed the ETL
cleaning process
and the ETL
into a database.
Again,
using those packages
we talked about
with the tidyverse
and hater
and dbplyr and pins
to basically pull
all these different data sources
together,
execute some models
and then save it out
somewhere.
As far as
the model training
and batch scoring,
we're doing that
with like an XGBoost model,
scheduling the training
to execute,
batch scoring it out,
and then writing
the scores out
to a database
as well as saving out
the trained model.
So all of that,
again,
is occurring inside Connect
and can be done
with R or Python.
I could replace
R Markdown
with say,
Jupyter
and do a very similar
process
within Connect
as well.
Now,
closing out,
we'll talk a little bit more
about business users
and show an example
of how we can make
those reports
a little bit prettier
and kind of how to meet them
where they want to be.
So for business users,
these reports
are going out
to potentially
like non-technical colleagues
who are decision makers
or business analysts
or executives.
And here,
you're more worried
about packaging up
the data
or your story,
your visualization,
your tables,
but you're not as worried
about showing the code,
although some people
may want to see the code.
So how do you make this report
that fits your company style
or one that's attractive
and useful for them?
We showed those reports earlier.
They were pretty bare bones
and not that many people
would be excited
about receiving
just a black and white report
with a lot of code
being printed out.
Like,
they might be confused
about some of that.
So we can do,
and the examples
I'll show here in one second,
are using different themes
or using different customization
of the appearance.
So our Markdown theme,
say,
from the Bootstrap lib
or BS lib package.
This allows you
to customize
the entire appearance
of our Markdown
as well as
Shiny applications
or other kind
of downstream effects.
So custom themes,
you know,
customizing small components
as well as bringing in
some of the boot swatch themes,
which are entire themes
that have been created
by the community.
So let's show a quick example
of this.
I'll hop back
into our studio.
And let's first run
a very basic report.
Again,
all of this code
is available
on the GitHub repository
that's linked in the slides.
But let's take
a no-theme report
and just knit that out.
Very simple report.
We're not going to
blow anyone's minds
with this report,
but just showing
what it looks like.
It's a basic report.
It shows the code,
it's got a graphic,
and it's got
an interactive graphic
and a table.
Pretty bare bones
in terms of it's black and white
and not really themed at all.
And that's fine.
This might be useful
for the data science team,
but the business users
might expect more.
So what we can do with them
is using Bootstrap Lib,
we can actually create
a custom theme.
So I can make one
more aligned with, say,
like the RStudio brand
and use these background colors
of like a light gray
or doing a RStudio blue color,
and I can render that out.
So here I'm taking
our Markdown document
and just changing
the HTML document output
and applying Bootstrap Lib
theme to it.
So if I knit this document,
this RMarkdown doc,
it's going to look
a little bit different.
Still fairly bare boned,
but you can see
that it's got this kind
of gray background,
the fonts have been changed,
but the graphics
haven't been changed
in terms of we still
have this white background
on the graphic.
So we're missing a component
here of translating
the RMarkdown theming
into the graphics themselves.
The table looks okay.
It's, you know,
gray and blue,
but we do have this nice
kind of like RStudio blue
at the bottom.
So there's one more step
we can do here.
We've themed essentially
the RMarkdown document,
but we need to translate
that theming into,
you know, the plot,
into Plotly or the table
or ggplot.
So there's this chunk here
with thematic
or the thematic package,
which allows me to pass
all of this theming
that I've done
to the RMarkdown
automatically into ggplot
and Plotly graphics.
So I've made this
chunk eval to true.
I can knit this,
and we'll take a look
at it again now.
So on this report,
we can see that the graphic
completely blends
into the document
in terms of there's not
a white background
that's making it contrast.
We've actually applied
the theming
of the overall document
into the graphic.
It's applied this
alternative color scale
like a blue-green-yellow
that's a bit more
visually appealing
than the default graphics
or default colors
that ggplot loses.
And this works for both
interactive graphics
and Plotly
and ggplots
that we see here.
The table itself,
you can see the fonts
have changed.
So we have this
Spira sans code
that I really like,
and then it's changed
the colors
of the overall
kind of navigation
of this table.
So while these
might seem like
small changes
that you're doing,
they're actually
very powerful for
connecting with your
business users
and helping them
actually want to see
the reports
or kind of working
with them
and the theming
that you're working on.
So I showed what this
looked like interactively,
but as far as
Bootstrap Lib
and the things
you can change,
you can look at
the Bootstrap theme
function from BS Lib,
and this shows you
you can change
the background
and secondary colors
as well as fonts
for the heading,
base,
code,
and scaling
of those fonts.
The YAML header
I used in that
R Markdown document
looked like this.
So HTML document
with a specific theme,
and I changed
the background,
foreground,
and a few other
different components,
and it can even bring
in Google fonts for you.
So you have access
to hundreds
of different fonts
that you can embed
inside your document.
That second component
that we talked about
was thematic,
which was actually
passing this theme
into your plots,
and that's what
thematic is providing
with thematic
R Markdown.
Now, you may not
even want to worry
about doing a lot
of customization.
You could use something
like R Markdown Distill.
So this is like
scientific and technical
writing native
to the web.
It's got amazing defaults,
and it looks
really, really nice.
So this gives you
the ability
to very quickly
take the exact same
code you're running,
but make it look better.
So let's go back
into the R Markdown
document,
in this case,
a Distill doc
that we're working on,
and we'll knit
that out.
Exact same code
as before.
You know,
we're not doing
anything crazy.
We're just, you know,
showing that other part.
And now we have
a nice-looking report
with very good defaults.
So this instantaneously,
even though it's
black and white,
to me,
it's much more
visually appealing.
So let's go back
into our R Markdown
document,
and we'll take
that R Markdown
that we're working
on,
and it's much more
visually appealing.
I've got kind of this
floating table of contents
where I can navigate
back and forth
between the different
components.
I've got nice fonts
that it defaults to,
and it's kind of making
this smaller
center portion
and assigning things
to these columns
where it's a bit nicer
to work with.
So with essentially
no work on my part,
just by changing
one chunk
of the YAML header,
I can make
a nicer-looking report,
or if I wanted
to go very deep,
I could go
full customization
with Bootstrap Lib
and make these reports
look even better.
Now the last portion
we have in the last few
minutes that we have
for today
is talking about
emails and sending out
emails from RStudio
Connect with the
Blastula package.
So Blastula makes it
easy to produce
and send
HTML emails
from R.
So this is very powerful
in being able to
combine things like
ggplots or tables
or data
and embed them
into emails
that you're sending
to your colleagues.
So emails can obviously
be sent through
SMTP,
so you can do
something like
send them via Gmail,
but more commonly
we see a lot of
customers use
RStudio Connect
to send these emails
through the built-in
mail server.
So this uses your
actually existing
company email
and uses that type
of authentication
as opposed to being
limited to Gmail
or something external
to your company.
It's really easy
to kind of
render these emails.
Basically,
you take
Render Connect email
with a specific
body of the document
and then attach
that email
to the body
of the document
in terms of
render it
and attach it.
So it's not only
going to show it inline
in terms of your
actual email will be
shown when they
open their inbox,
but you can attach
different things to it,
whether that's a copy
of the HTML
or a PDF report
or an Excel file,
whatever you want
to attach to that.
Now,
we'll jump back
over and
talk about
the
Connect Live
examples
and what that looks
like.
When I say
built-in mail server,
what I really mean here
is that you can install
a mail server
and send it
through Connect
so you don't have to rely
on an external
thing like Gmail.
You can have Connect
talk to a mail server
protocol
through your company.
So let's hop
back over to here.
What these emails
actually look like
is what I'll show
briefly.
And let's do
the main document.
Now,
these emails
could go out
to one person
or they could go out
to an entire host
of people.
So part of what
Connect is doing
is letting you
bring in things
like your
authentication groups
so you can send
to your entire
executive team
or the entire
sales team
data science team
and send it out
to all of them.
So here we have
an R Markdown report.
This R Markdown report
is not special
in any sense.
We can knit it
and take a look
at the repository.
The main thing
we're looking at here
is this is what the
actual R Markdown
document looks like.
So you could schedule
this to be executed
and it would generate
this,
which is intended
for the data scientist.
It's actually like,
here's what we were doing,
here's talking about
the report
and showing some
of the data.
Here at the bottom,
and I'll zoom in
a little bit,
it has some information
saying we can actually
attach the email.
That was the
render Connect email
and attach the email
that we were doing.
It kind of jumped
the gun there,
but it actually sent it out
and this is what the email
would look like
inside your actual
email client.
So this would actually
be the body of the email.
You not only have text
and headers,
but you can embed
ggplot graphics,
you can print data,
or even embed
specific tables.
So you could use
like the GT package
to theme a table
and attach it there.
And then it gives you
this nice footer saying,
hey, this content
was generated,
is everything in line?
And then you can actually
go to the live examples
and click back into
the report that's
actually out there.
So that was the preview.
Now in terms of
if I were inside Connect,
like let's actually go
to an email one.
So I'm going to go
back into this
and talk a little bit
about the batch
sending of emails
because I know that was
a question that came up.
So let's do
content I own.
And let's say
I had this weather collector
and I wanted to send
an email to somebody.
Because Connect
has a connection
to an email server
that's been installed
alongside Connect,
I could email the report
and say,
just send me a copy
of this report.
I can basically say
do it now.
But more often
what I would do
is like schedule
the document
and have it send
an email out to people.
So every time it's run,
it sends the email out.
As far as
who it's being sent to,
that is up to you.
I'm the only person
looking at this document
right now,
but maybe I want to add
my colleague Kelly
or I want to add
the entire solutions team
at RStudio
to receive this.
So now all these people
being brought in
from our authentication protocol
will be receiving the email
if I want them to.
So I can go back
to schedule.
I can say send email
after update.
And I can send it
to all the viewers
and all the collaborators.
Basically send it
to everybody
who is interested
and have all this batch
email being sent out.
Now that might be useful
in terms of sending
these emails,
but what if that email
gets too noisy
running every single day?
Maybe I don't want
to see it every day.
And that's also where
Connect can help you
or Blastula can help you.
So this idea
of conditional execution
is basically,
yes,
every time a doc is rendered,
it can be useful
to send out an email.
But sometimes you want
that higher signal
to noise ratio
basically saying
only send an email
if a criteria is met or not.
So maybe data quality
is below expectation,
or your model is predicting
a value outside
a specific range,
or your data set
is too small.
It should be thousands
of rows,
and it's 20 rows.
Basically whatever
logical criteria
you want to define,
you can build that logic
into your R Markdown doc,
schedule it,
and then send out emails
conditionally based on that.
So just a few examples
of code.
You know,
here's an example
basically saying
if predictions
are outside of a range
or greater than
a predicted value,
then send me this email
basically saying,
oh no,
the model is drifting
or the model values
are too high.
Generate this other report
and email it to me.
Otherwise,
if values are below that,
it just doesn't
send the email.
It still executes
the code.
It still renders
your report,
but it doesn't warn anyone
because nothing
is there to be warned about.
The report will just be,
you know,
kicking along
and scheduled
as it rolls.
Another option
is rather than writing
that kind of
if else
with like the suppress
of the scheduled email,
you could have something
more along this idea
where you have
the option of sending
one report
or a basic report.
So here
we have a value
just in like pseudocode
saying if the value
is above some type of norm,
then give me a true
or a false.
And then we have
an if else statement
saying if that value
is high,
then send the
high alert email.
Basically,
render this specific email,
send it out to me,
and give me all this
extra metadata
about the report.
Otherwise,
just send the basic email
saying, yeah,
everything went along fine.
Here's the basic report
for the day.
And then
it will actually
send out that email
and attach the email
and do everything else.
Basically,
send along the email file
that you want
to bring along.
So not only can you look
at those different files,
but just showing you
what a R Markdown email
looks like.
So let's look at this.
The actual code itself
just looks like any other
R Markdown document.
And really,
that's the beauty of Blastula
is the only thing
you're really changing up here
is Blastula,
Blastula email
as the output format.
So it's going to say,
you know,
load the tidyverse,
bring in some data
from the parent document
that's rendering it,
and then let's create
a table at the end.
There's really not much
else to learn.
You're just using
all the other skills
you've learned with R
and with R Markdown
to write the document.
And Blastula is handling
the conversion
of this R Markdown
into the actual,
you know,
email that you've just created.
So now I've opened up
the actual rendered R Markdown
as an email.
All right.
So that was a deep,
rapid dive
through a lot of different things.
There's a lot
of different powerful things
you can do with Connect
and scheduling.
The one part
I want to touch on
before we leave
is I've shown a lot
of R Markdown,
but you can do
very similar things with,
if I get over to it,
with Jupyter.
So I do,
don't want to leave
those people out in the cold
in terms of you can also
do similar things
natively in Python.
So here we have
some stock examples
where we're using
Matplotlib and Pandas
to go over
to these documents,
pull them in,
and generate,
you know,
some graphics
and save some data out.
So this native Python code
in Jupyter Notebook
can also be scheduled,
and it will run
every weekday
and then publish the output.
We have the same ability
to look at older versions
and do your access controls
and scheduling
of those documents.
A second one might be,
again,
doing model training.
So rather than
just relying on Pandas,
you could also bring in
XGBoost or sklearn,
scikit-learn,
to actually train a model
in Python natively
and do training
and testing split,
training the model
and saving it out.
So this can also be done
and run on our
Studio Connect
as a Jupyter Notebook
with the same scheduling
that you're worried about.
All right.
So we're right here
at the end.
I've linked to
all the different content here.
Again, the slides
are available,
and I'll put those into chat.
So that is the link
to colorado.rstudio.com
and the slides,
which have all the sublinks
and link out to the code.
There's information
about Blastul emails
and in custom emails,
pins,
making beautiful reports
with Distil,
Thematic,
and BS Lib.
You can go a bit deeper
into the bike share example
and that kind of piecemeal,
deep example
of an end-to-end
data science solution.
Some other different examples
about data formats.
And then here on the right,
we have Connect scheduling
and email and updating,
and then two other webinars
that might be interesting to you.
These already occurred,
but there's a Beyond Dashboard
Fatigue webinar
with additional content.
Again,
open source code
where you can adapt it
and kind of use it
in your own organization.
And then this
Rethinking Reporting
with Automation
is another great webinar
from an outsider
to our studio
where they actually talked
about really focusing
on that kind of
business stakeholder.
I talked a little bit today
about business stakeholders
and data science colleagues,
but this Rethinking Reporting
does a really good job
of diving deep
into making beautiful reports
that are very useful.
If you just want to learn
more about Connect,
you can click on this link
which takes you to the
Connect landing page
and talks a little bit about
what RStudio Connect
can do for your organization.
With that,
thank you so much
for hanging around.
That was a full hour,
so always good
to hang out for that time.
Thank you for kind of
being part of this experiment
of doing some more
live content webinars.
And hopefully you're able
to join us from
very different locations.
Maybe join from YouTube
or LinkedIn
or Twitter or somewhere else.
Very excited to kind of be
meeting our different
community members
where they want to be meeting.
So thanks for your time today.
I'll look and see if there's
any other questions real quick.
And it looks like
my colleague Kelly,
I just want to say
thank you so much
for answering a lot
of these questions.
Looks like we're
in good shape there.
And thank you so much
for your time
and for hanging out
with me for an hour.
The slides, again,
I will share those.
They will be,
I can actually share
the GitHub repository
that has links to the slide,
the YouTube video,
as well as the slides themselves.
So this has all the source code.
It'll link to the YouTube video,
which is the primary
long-term storage,
the slides that I demoed today.
And then you can see
all this demo code
that you can adapt,
modify, or play around with
and look at it a while.
So you can download from here.
You could clone it
and edit it released
under a CC BY 2.0 license.
Oh, thanks so much, y'all.
It looks like Ahmad
gave me some help.
So again,
because I'm hosting this
on Connect,
I'm going to flip this over
to anyone can access it,
no login required.
So go ahead
and take a look at it.
Thank you, Ahmad,
for the shout out there.
So it should be public
and accessible for everyone now.
Have a wonderful day.
Thanks for joining us
on another data science livestream.
And we will see you next time.
So I'll say goodbye from here.
Thanks again.
And if you have other suggestions,
feel free to reach out to me
on Twitter at Thomas underscore mock
or on LinkedIn.
I'd love to hear
from y'all in the community.
What is the next thing
you want to see
in terms of like
what type of content
would be useful for you
or would be helpful
for your learning
and your education?
So thanks again.
Have a great day.
Stay safe and happy holidays.